Support for rollout-operator and Zone Awareness (#2437) (#2778)
grafana/mimir: docs/sources/migration-guide/migrating-from-single-zone-with-helm.md

1. Speeding up rollout of alertmanagers in case there are more than 3 replicas. In this case use the default value in the `small.yaml`, `large.yaml`, `capped-small.yaml` or `capped-large.yaml`. The default value defines 3 "virtual" zones and sets affinity rules so that alertmanagers from different zones do not mix, but it allows multiple alertmanagers of the same zone on the same node:

   ```yaml
   alertmanager:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       topologyKey: "kubernetes.io/hostname" # Triggers creating anti-affinity rules
   ```

1. Geographical redundancy. In this case you need to set a suitable [nodeSelector](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/) value to choose where the pods of each zone are to be placed. Setting `topologyKey` will instruct the Helm chart to create anti-affinity rules so that alertmanagers from different zones do not mix, but it allows multiple alertmanagers of the same zone on the same node. For example:
   ```yaml
   alertmanager:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       topologyKey: "kubernetes.io/hostname" # Triggers creating anti-affinity rules
       zones:
         - name: zone-a
           nodeSelector:

>              topology.kubernetes.io/zone: zone-a

Author: good idea

1. Create a new empty YAML file called `migrate.yaml`.

1. Enable flushing data from ingesters to storage on shutdown.

   Copy the following into the `migrate.yaml` file:

   ```yaml
   mimir:
     structuredConfig:
       blocks_storage:
         flush_blocks_on_shutdown: true
       ingester:
         ring:
           unregister_on_shutdown: true

   ingester:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       enabled: false
   ```

1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command and make sure to provide the flag `-f migrate.yaml` as the last flag.

1. Wait for all ingesters to restart and be ready.

1. Turn off traffic to the installation.

   Replace the contents of the `migrate.yaml` file with:

   ```yaml
   mimir:
     structuredConfig:
       blocks_storage:
         flush_blocks_on_shutdown: true
       ingester:
         ring:
           unregister_on_shutdown: true

   ingester:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       enabled: false

   nginx:
     replicas: 0
   gateway:
     replicas: 0
   ```

1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command and make sure to provide the flag `-f migrate.yaml` as the last flag.

> 1. Wait until there is no nginx or gateway running.

Author: There is no new config , the configuration is the same as in the previous step - and we did ask the user for that to take effect on line 367

     ingester_limits:
       max_series: X # <-- double it
     overrides:
       tenantA:
         max_global_series_per_metric: Y # <-- double it
         max_global_series_per_user: Z # <-- double it
   ```

1. Create a new empty YAML file called `migrate.yaml`.

1. Start the migration.

   Copy the following into the `migrate.yaml` file:

   ```yaml
   ingester:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       enabled: true
       migration:
         enabled: true
         replicas: 0

   rollout_operator:
     enabled: true
   ```

   [//]: # "ingester-step1"

1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command and make sure to provide the flag `-f migrate.yaml` as the last flag.

   In this step new zone aware statefulsets are created - but no new pods are started yet. The parameter `ingester.ring.zone_awareness_enabled: true` is set in the Mimir configuration via the `mimir.config` value. The flag `-ingester.ring.zone-awareness-enabled=false` is set on distributors, rulers and queriers. The flags `-blocks-storage.tsdb.flush-blocks-on-shutdown` and `-ingester.ring.unregister-on-shutdown` are set to true for the ingesters.

1. Wait for all Mimir components to restart and be ready.

> 1. Progressively scale zone-aware ingesters up, maximum 21 at a time.

Reviewer: Can you explain me the 21 limit?

Author: I'm adding some explanation. Sublist sounds like a good idea, also the zone-aware replication config uses zone-aware: https://grafana.com/docs/mimir/latest/operators-guide/configure/configuring-zone-aware-replication/ . Going to review the text to make it consistent.

Author: I've reworked this part.

1. Enable zone awareness on the read path.

   Replace the contents of the `migrate.yaml` file with:

   ```yaml
   ingester:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       enabled: true
       migration:
         enabled: true
         writePath: true
         readPath: true

   rollout_operator:
     enabled: true
   ```

   [//]: # "ingester-step4"

1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command and make sure to provide the flag `-f migrate.yaml` as the last flag.

   In this step the flag `-ingester.ring.zone-awareness-enabled=false` is removed from queriers.

1. Wait until all queriers have restarted and are ready.

1. Exclude non zone aware ingesters from the write path.

   Replace the contents of the `migrate.yaml` file with:

   ```yaml
   ingester:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       enabled: true
       migration:
         enabled: true
         writePath: true
         readPath: true
         excludeDefaultZone: true

   rollout_operator:
     enabled: true
   ```

   [//]: # "ingester-step5"

1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command and make sure to provide the flag `-f migrate.yaml` as the last flag.

>    In this step the flag `-distributor.excluded-zones=zone-default` is added to distributors and rulers.

Reviewer: The flag is
```suggestion
   In this step the flag `-ingester.ring.excluded-zones=zone-default=zone-default` is added to distributors and rulers.
```

Author: fixed

1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command using your regular command line flags.

1. Wait at least 3 hours.

   The 3 hours is calculated from `blocks_storage.tsdb.block_ranges_period` + `blocks_storage.tsdb.head_compaction_idle_timeout` Grafana Mimir parameters to give enough time for ingesters to remove stale series from memory. Stale series will be there due to series being moved between ingesters.

1. If you are using [shuffle sharding]({{< relref "../operators-guide/configure/configuring-shuffle-sharding" >}}):

   1. Wait an extra 12 hours.

      The 12 hours is calculated from the `querier.query_store_after` Grafana Mimir parameter. After this time, no series are stored outside their dedicated shard, meaning that shuffle sharding on the read path can be safely enabled.

   1. Remove these values from your configuration:

      ```yaml
      querier:
        extraArgs:
          "querier.shuffle-sharding-ingesters-enabled": "false"
      ruler:
        extraArgs:
          "querier.shuffle-sharding-ingesters-enabled": "false"
      ```

   1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command using your regular command line flags.

>    1. Wait until queriers and rulers have restarted and are ready.

Author: nice catch , down

1. Undo the doubling of series limits done in the first step.

> 1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command using your regular command line flags.

Reviewer: so I am writing the getting to production guide. I wanted to get a single snippet of yaml that enables zone-awareness on a fresh installation. Is this available anywhere? I think having it in values.yaml would be most useful (like a commented out YAML block)

I found this further up in the article and I think I should just toggle `enabled`, but I can't be sure
```yaml
   ingester:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       enabled: false # Do not turn on zone awareness without migration because of potential data loss
       topologyKey: "kubernetes.io/hostname" # Triggers creating anti-affinity rules
       zones:
         - name: zone-a
           nodeSelector:
             topology.kubernetes.io/zone: zone-a
         - name: zone-b
           nodeSelector:
             topology.kubernetes.io/zone: zone-b
         - name: zone-c
           nodeSelector:
             topology.kubernetes.io/zone: zone-c
```

Author: Yes, toggle enabled to true (although for ingesters and store-gateways it will be true by default).
I'll revise the inline documentation in values.yaml for clarity.

Author: done, please check

            replicas: <N>

      rollout_operator:
        enabled: true
      ```

      [//]: # "ingester-step2"

      > **Note**: replace `<N>` with the number of replicas in each step until `<N>` reaches the same number as in `ingester.replicas`, do not increase `<N>` with more than 21 in each step.

   1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command and make sure to provide the flag `-f migrate.yaml` as the last flag.

   1. Once the new ingesters are started and are ready, wait at least 3 hours.

      The 3 hours is calculated from `blocks_storage.tsdb.block_ranges_period` + `blocks_storage.tsdb.head_compaction_idle_timeout` Grafana Mimir parameters to give enough time for ingesters to remove stale series from memory. Stale series will be there due to series being moved between ingesters.

   1. If the current `<N>` above in `ingester.zoneAwareReplication.migration.replicas` is less than `ingester.replicas`, go back and increase `<N>` with at most 21 and repeat these four steps.

1. If you are using [shuffle sharding]({{< relref "../operators-guide/configure/configuring-shuffle-sharding" >}}), it must be turned off on the read path at this point.

>    1. Update your configuration with these values and keep them until otherwise instructed.

Reviewer: should this go into `migrate.yaml`? Because if yes, then we later instruct them to replace its contents with other things.

   ```yaml
   ingester:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       enabled: true
       migration:
         enabled: true
         writePath: true
         readPath: true
         excludeDefaultZone: true

   rollout_operator:
     enabled: true
   ```

   [//]: # "ingester-step5"

1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command and make sure to provide the flag `-f migrate.yaml` as the last flag.

   In this step the flag `-ingester.ring.excluded-zones=zone-default` is added to distributors and rulers.

1. Wait until all distributors and rulers have restarted and are ready.

1. Scale down non zone-aware ingesters to 0.

   Replace the contents of the `migrate.yaml` file with:

   ```yaml
   ingester:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       enabled: true
       migration:
         enabled: true
         writePath: true
         readPath: true
         excludeDefaultZone: true
         scaleDownDefaultZone: true

   rollout_operator:
     enabled: true
   ```

   [//]: # "ingester-step6"

1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command and make sure to provide the flag `-f migrate.yaml` as the last flag.

1. Wait until all non zone-aware ingesters are terminated.

> 1. Delete the default zone.

Reviewer: This felt a but cryptic. You are telling me to get rid of migrate.yaml and add parts of it back to my custom.yaml. But the step is called "delete the default zone." The step also changes some CLI flags and removes some annotations on services. Maybe add more detail for what is happening

Reviewer: Different thing: we don't tell them to clean up the PVs after this is deleted. I think it's a friendly thing to do - "heads up, if you don't delete the PVs you will keep paying for them." Same goes for AM and st-gw

   ```yaml
   alertmanager:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       enabled: true
       migration:
         enabled: true
         writePath: true

   rollout_operator:
     enabled: true
   ```

   [//]: # "alertmanager-step2"

1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command and make sure to provide the flag `-f migrate.yaml` as the last flag.

1. Wait until all new zone aware alertmanagers are started.

1. Scale down old alertmanagers to 0.

   Replace the contents of the `migrate.yaml` file with:

   ```yaml
   alertmanager:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       enabled: true
       migration:
         enabled: true
         writePath: true
         scaleDownDefaultZone: true

   rollout_operator:
     enabled: true
   ```

   [//]: # "alertmanager-step3"

1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command and make sure to provide the flag `-f migrate.yaml` as the last flag.

1. Wait until old non zone aware alertmanagers are terminated.

1. Set the final configuration.

   **Merge** the last values in `migrate.yaml` file into your regular `custom.yaml` file:

   ```yaml
   alertmanager:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       enabled: true

   rollout_operator:

>      enabled: true

Author: It's a helm limitation, believe me we tried :( The code that could evaluate complex condition, as in:
```
   condition: ingester.zoneAwareReplication.enabled,store_gateway.zoneAwareReplication.enabled,alertmanager.zoneAwareReplication.enabled
```
is stupid and only evaluates the first value it finds and stops if it's `false`. See https://github.com/helm/helm/blob/main/pkg/chartutil/dependencies.go#L34 .

Set the chosen configuration in your custom values (e.g. `custom.yaml`).

> **Note**: Do not turn on zone awareness without migration because of potential query errors, make sure that `store_gateway.zoneAwareReplication.enabled` is set to false.

```yaml
store_gateway:
  zoneAwareReplication:
    enabled: false
```

> **Note**: The number of store gateway pods that will be started is derived from `store_gateway.replicas`. Each zone will start `store_gateway.replicas / number of zones` pods, rounded up to the nearest integer value. For example if you have 3 zones, then `store_gateway.replicas=3` will yield 1 store gateway per zone, but `store_gateway.replicas=4` will yield 2 per zone, 6 in total.

### Decide which migration path to take for store gateways

There are two ways to do the migration:

1. With downtime. In this [procedure](#migrate-store-gateways-with-downtime) ingress is stopped to the cluster while store gateways are migrated. This is the quicker and simpler way.
1. Without downtime. This is a multi step [procedure](#migrate-store-gateways-without-downtime) which requires additional hardware resources as the old and new store gateways run in parallel for some time.

> ### Migrate store gateways with downtime

Author: No, because it does use extra resource which the user may not have at the time. Do you think we should still remove it?

> ### Migrate store gateways with downtime

Reviewer 2: No, keep it :)

1. Create a new empty YAML file called `migrate.yaml`.

> 1. Turn off traffic to the installation.

Author: Fair , will do

> 1. Turn off traffic to the installation.

Author: revised, I'm still calling it "with downtime", maybe call it "with partial service" or something?

> 1. Turn off traffic to the installation.

Reviewer 2: Calling it "with downtime" looks good to me (it makes it clear to understand). My comment was about the while traffic shutdown, which is not required.

1. Create the new zone aware store gateways

   Copy the following into the `migrate.yaml` file:

   ```yaml
   store_gateway:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       enabled: true
       migration:
         enabled: true

   rollout_operator:
     enabled: true
   ```

   [//]: # "storegateway-step1"

1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command and make sure to provide the flag `-f migrate.yaml` as the last flag.

1. Wait for all new store gateways to start up.

1. Wait for store gateways to sync all blocks.

   The logs of the new store gateways should contain the line "successfully synchronized TSDB blocks for all users".

1. Make the read path use the new zone aware store gateways.

   Replace the contents of the `migrate.yaml` file with:

   ```yaml
   store_gateway:
     zoneAwareReplication:
       enabled: true
       migration:
         enabled: true
         readPath: true

   rollout_operator:
     enabled: true
   ```

   [//]: # "storegateway-step2"

1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command and make sure to provide the flag `-f migrate.yaml` as the last flag.

1. Wait for the `helm` command to finish.

> 1. Scale down non zone aware store gateways to 0.

Author: I'll try this again, but in my kubernetes it didn't work. Maybe I missed something.

> 1. Scale down non zone aware store gateways to 0.

Author: Not sure why I had this wrong, fixed now, one step less.

---
title: "Migrate from single zone to zone aware replication with Helm"
menuTitle: "Migrate from single zone to zone aware replication with Helm"
description: "Learn how to migrate from having a single availability zone to full zone aware replication using the Grafana Mimir Helm chart"
weight: 10
---

# Migrate from single zone to zone aware replication with Helm

> This document explains how to migrate stateful componens from single zone to zone aware replication with Helm. The three components in question are the [alertmanager]({{< relref "../operators-guide/architecture/components/alertmanager.md" >}}), the [store-gateway]({{< relref "../operators-guide/architecture/components/store-gateway.md" >}}) and the [ingester]({{< relref "../operators-guide/architecture/components/ingester.md" >}}).

Author: referenced now

   ```

Set the chosen configuration in your custom values (e.g. `custom.yaml`).

> **Note**: The number of alertmanager pods that will be started is derived from `alertmanager.replicas`. Each zone will start `alertmanager.replicas / number of zones` pods, rounded up to the nearest integer value. For example if you have 3 zones, then `alertmanager.replicas=3` will yield 1 alertmanaer per zone, but `alertmanager.replicas=4` will yield 2 per zone, 6 in total.

### Migrate alertmanager

1. Create a new empty YAML file called `migrate.yaml`.

1. Start the migration.

   Copy the following into the `migrate.yaml`:

   ```yaml
   alertmanager:
     zone_aware_replication:
       enabled: true
       migration:
         enabled: true

   rollout_operator:
     enabled: true
   ```
   [//]: # "alertmanager-step1"

1. Upgrade the installation with the `helm` command and make sure to provide the flag `-f migrate.yaml` as the last flag.

   In this step zone awareness is enabled with the default zone. In this step new StatefulSets are created for zone aware alertmanagers, but no new pods are started.

1. Wait until all alertmanagers are restarted.

> 1. Scale up zone aware alertmanagers.

Author: fixed wording as discussed IRL
